**Objective **

*Understand how the ventricular substrate is affected by psychological
triggers, which are modulated by the autonomic nervous system, leading
to ventricular tachycardia and ventricular fibrillation.*

**Road map**

1.  Ventricular substrate

2.  History

3.  Story of sudden cardiac death

4.  Autonomic modulation

5.  Heart rate variability

6.  Triggering sudden death

7.  Autonomic risk

**Timeline**

1889 John MacWilliam proposed that VF was the mechanism behind SCD.^1^
Prior names were *fatal syncope, delirium cordis, circus contraction,*
and *intervermiform*

1914 Garrey found that a fibrillating ventricle required a minimum mass,
and \<4 cm could not sustain VF.^2^

1916 The first cardiac sympathectomy was performed by ﻿Jonnesco to
protect a patient from recurrent angina pectoris and ventricular
tachyarrhythmias, and was successful.^3^

1947 The first defibrillation occurred in an operating room on a 14-year
old boy undergoing repair of a pectus deformity by Dr. Claude Beck.^4^

1968 Coronary care units, advocated for by Dr. Bernard Lown, had existed
now for several years, with a notable drop in SCD after MI, from \>40%
to \<20%.^5^

1970 Chest thump was indicated for reverting ventricular tachycardia and
preventing cardiac arrest, supported by studies in NEJM.^6^

1971 Case series of SCD after proximal stressful event (grief, loss,
mourning, threat), but also happy events like a reunion (such as with
*happy heart syndrome*).^7^

1973 In an industrial plant in Rochester, NY, there were 26 reported
cases of sudden death. Interviews with family noted that these
individuals had been depressed over the past several weeks, and the
events happened in the setting of acute arousal, either through
increased work, anxiety, or anger.^8^ In Finland, study on 229 cases of
SCD were identified to have preceding life stressors. ^9^

1975 Circulation published work by Kolman and Lown on vagal stimulation
as having a protective effect on susceptibility to VF.^10^

1981 Parasympathetic blockade was found to extinguished high frequency
changes in heart rate variability, suggesting a vagal influence.^11^

1983 Metoprolol was found to be effective at reducing ventricular
arrhythmias after myocardial infarction.^12^ The 1980s were part of the
wide-spread adoption of beta-blockers in myocardial ischemia.

1990 Japanese reported severe negative stress precipitated a
cardiomyopathy involving apical ballooning, now known as *Takotsubo
syndrome*.^13^

1991 Schwartz demonstrated that accentuated anatagonisn of stmpathetic
tone by vagal tone occurred in conscious canines for the first time.^14^

1999 Muller described the pattern of MACE to have a bimodal distribution
during the day, from 6 AM to 10 AM, and then secondly at 6 PM to 8
PM.^15^

References

1\. de Silva RA. John MacWilliam, evolutionary biology and sudden cardiac
death. *J Am Coll Cardiol*. 1989;14(7):1843-1849.
doi:10.1016/0735-1097(89)90041-72. Garrey WE. The Nature of Fibrillary
Contraction of the Heart \-- Its Relation to Tissue Mass and Form. *Am J
Physiol Content*. 1914;33(3):397-414.
doi:10.1152/ajplegacy.1914.33.3.3973. Schwartz PJ, De Ferrari GM,
Pugliese L. Cardiac sympathetic denervation 100 years later: Jonnesco
would have never believed it. *Int J Cardiol*. 2017;237:25-28.
doi:10.1016/j.ijcard.2017.03.0204. Meyer JA. Claude Beck and Cardiac
Resuscitation. *Ann Thorac Surg*. 1988;45(1):103-105.
doi:10.1016/S0003-4975(10)62412-55. Lown B, Selzer A. The coronary care
unit. *Am J Cardiol*. 1968;22(4):597-602.
doi:10.1016/0002-9149(68)90167-76. Pennington JE, Taylor J, Lown B.
Chest Thump for Reverting Ventricular Tachycardia. *N Engl J Med*.
1970;283(22):1192-1195. doi:10.1056/NEJM1970112628322047. Engel GL.
Sudden and rapid death during psychological stress. Folklore or folk
wisdom? *Ann Intern Med*. 1971;74(5):771-782.
doi:10.7326/0003-4819-74-5-7718. Greene WA, Goldstein S, Moss AJ.
Psychosocial Aspects of Sudden Death: A Preliminary Report. *Arch Intern
Med*. 1972;129(5):725-731. doi:10.1001/archinte.1972.003200500490059.
Rahe RH, Bennett L, Romo M, Siltanen P, Arthur RJ. Subjects' recent life
changes and coronary heart disease in Finland. *Am J Psychiatry*.
1973;130(11):1222-1226. doi:10.1176/ajp.130.11.122210. Kolman BS,
Verrier RL, Lown B. The effect of vagus nerve stimulation upon
vulnerability of the canine ventricle. *Circulation*.
1975;52(4):578-585. doi:10.1161/01.CIR.52.4.57811. Akselrod S, Gordon D,
Ubel FA, Shannon DC, Barger AC, Cohen RJ. Power spectrum analysis of
heart rate fluctuation: A quantitative probe of beat-to-beat
cardiovascular control. *Science (80- )*. 1981;213(4504):220-222.
doi:10.1126/science.616604512. Rydén L, Ariniego R, Arnman K, et al. A
Double-Blind Trial of Metoprolol in Acute Myocardial Infarction. *N Engl
J Med*. 1983;308(11):614-618. doi:10.1056/NEJM19830317308110213. Sato H.
Takotsubo-like left ventricular dysfunction due to multivessel coronary
spasm. *Kagaku-hyoronsha Publ Co*. 1990:56-64.14. Stramba-Badiale M,
Vanoli E, De Ferrari GM, Cerati D, Foreman RD, Schwartz PJ.
Sympathetic-parasympathetic interaction and accentuated antagonism in
conscious dogs. *Am J Physiol Circ Physiol*. 1991;260(2):H335-H340.
doi:10.1152/ajpheart.1991.260.2.H33515. Muller JE. Circadian variation
in cardiovascular events. *Am J Hypertens*. 1999;12(2 Pt 2):35S-42S.
doi:10.1016/S0895-7061(98)00278-7
